# General Lab Policies and Guidelines
Welcome to the [Bahlai Lab of Applied Quantitative Ecology](https://bahlailab.org/)! I'm very excited that you're here. In this lab, we study a variety of habitats, taxa and processes, with the core elements of using data, math and computational techniques to gain better understanding of ecological systems. We're committed to applying what we learn to making the world a better place- by supporting sustainability and productivity in working ecosystems, by making the work we do accessible to the broader community, and by drawing in diverse viewpoints to enhance mutual understanding of science, scientists, and the needs of the world.  

## Open philosophy
First and foremost, the Bahlai Lab is an [open science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_science) lab. There are several major facets to this, but the core is: *the way this lab operates is grounded in my personal belief that participation in science is a public act, and done in the public good.* Science allows us to be part of something bigger, and to foster a *healthy, collaborative and truly inclusive and equitable scientific enterprise, it's essential that we give back at least as much as we take from the community*. I could get down into the weeds about specific tools and techniques that we use in our open science infrastructure here, but those tools are used to support these values, [they themselves are not the values](https://www.americanscientist.org/article/open-science-isnt-always-open-to-all-scientists). What we commit to do, as open scientists, is:

* Seek out expertise from conventional and unconventional stakeholders in our work. Invite comment and participation. Maintain a diaglogue. Welcome feedback. Break down the barriers that prevent any and all interested parties from engaging in your corner of science.

* Make supporting research data freely available whenever possible, to support future use in meta-analyses, reviews, and revisitations of our work. 

* Respect privacy and confidentiality in cases where data or research products contain sensitive information, or information that otherwise does not belong to you. Do no harm. 

* Produce and share reproducible, re-usable data manipulation and analysis code, so people can understand our assumptions and workflows, and so future scientists can learn from our efforts without duplicating them.

* Publish final manuscripts AND intermediate research products in the most universally accessible formats available to us. 

* Acknowledge contributions to our work. Provide [territorial acknowledgements](http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/territorial-acknowledgements-indigenous-1.4175136). Cite the ideas of others. Don't pretend we work in a vacuum. Use your platform to lift others and give them a platform, too.

* Act as ambassadors of open science, and science in general, to the broader scientific community and the world. Help people see what we do, but *respect the constraints others must work under.*

## Mentoring philosophy  
I believe that the role of a mentor is that of a guide and a support for you as you work towards your goals. I strive to maintain an open dialogue with my mentees about their goals and directions, and provide direction, support, and resources wherever I can, and connect you to people that can help, when I can't.  I believe the single most important product of science is human capital- people who can go forward in the world, work hard, and make changes to make lives better. I am deeply invested in helping you develop as a colleague, a scientist, and a citizen of the world. I mainly ask that you bring a willingness to work hard and think hard, be open to changing and developing yourself, and a commitment to science, truth, and kindness- I will endeavour to bring the same things to our relationship. My door is open, even if it's physically closed sometimes (it gets noisy in the hall!) 

I prefer to be a cheerleader to a boss, however, there will be situations where I will have to push you, make tough calls, and offer correction- this is to be expected- you're learning. I do expect my students to bring considerable self-motivation to the table: for this relationship to work, I need you to want to not just learn and attain a credential, but to take responsibility for, and leadership over, your individual projects. I can't make you the world expert on what you do, but you can- and that is your job now. Read deeply, ask lots of questions, think creatively. Science in my lab is very different from science in the classroom- we don't have right answers, we chip away at figuring out how things work, in the context of what other people, chipping away, have found. Learning to thrive figuring out stuff at the edge of the unknown- that's what science is to me, and what I hope it will become for you. You will be wrong. All the time. That is normal.

I generally offer positive feedback profusely, and negative feedback in the form of re-direction. This sounds good on paper, but it doesn't work great for people who want/need a lot of very specific guidance from a supervisor on their project. Part of this is intentional- I want you to take the lead in your project. If something isn't working and I offer suggestions for dramatically different paths, it means it's because I perceive you are stuck and I would like you to try something new to get unstuck. Being stuck is the worst- I would rather you tried 10 different wrong things than not try anything because you're stuck on finding the right way to start. Not all of my suggestions will be good! Seek feedback from others, research the problem deeply, but more than anything- keep trying, keep doing.

I also believe that the mentor-mentee relationship is reciprocal-you have experiences, skills and ideas that I do not, please share them! You have been selected for this lab not just because of your passions and eagerness for learning, but also because I believe you can bring your unique perspective to problems. I look forward to learning from you.

I believe that science is better when it's diverse and inclusive, and that means removing barriers and meeting people where they are, whenever possible. If you want to work in the Bahlai Lab, or are currently working here and facing a barrier affecting your ability to do work and contribute to your fullest extent, please let me know (in as specific or nonspecific terms as you are comfortable) so we can work together with campus resources and build necessary accomodations. 

## Grad student expectations
The expectations of graduate students enrolled in our MS and PhD programs in the [Kent State University Department of Biological Sciences](https://www.kent.edu/biology) are outlined in our [graduate student handbook](https://du1ux2871uqvu.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/file/BSCI%20Grad%20Handbook%202017.pdf). The back of this guide contains links to specific forms, including a checklist of degree completion requirements for both the MS and PhD programs. We will use this as a template for your individual expectations within the lab.

*This may seem obvious, but to be clear: **I expect you to have strong interests in insects (and/or other taxa, I'm cool with plants and stuff), math and modelling and programming and informatics and quantitative ecology, and drive for doing original work that advances science.** I also want to you think about why you want a graduate degree- how does this program and this research advance your presonal goals? I am here to support you but I also have very high expectations for you- I expect all of my students to be driven: to do, to learn and to make, in pursuit of their goals. I expect you to be committed to immersing yourself in your program: I want you to have a full life with friends and family and hobbies but a graduate program, by its nature, will take a lot of you, and a lot of time. This IS A BIG COMMITMENT and you need to be both available and open for it. We can do amazing things with your work but the ultimate drive needs to come from you. I will not drag you through a graduate program.*

I pledge to you that I will incorporate your goals and path when establishing your expectations for your program. Although peer reviewed papers are largely the currency of 'success' in the dominant academic scientific paradigm, I understand and value that they are not the only measure of progress, growth and accomplishment in your development as a scientist. I will meet with each graduate student on a regular basis to discuss goals, directions and progress. Early in your program, we will establish a private repository where we will outline our shared expectations and goals for your graduate program, including timelines and deliverables, and write a [Mentoring Plan](https://dynamicecology.wordpress.com/2017/01/09/mentoring-plans-a-really-useful-tool-for-pis-and-their-lab-members/). This repository can also be used to store documents and other relevant paperwork for your program. There will be core elements for all students, but what I'm really hoping to get here is your personal definition of success, and a defined path for getting there. This may evolve over the course of your program, but the idea is to keep you working with intention, while providing me with a clear outline of how I can best support your efforts.




